As I remember, Adam,
it was upon this fashionbequeathed me by will
but poor 1,000 crowns
and, as thou sayest,
charged my brother on hisblessing
to breed me well:
and there begins mysadness.
My brother Jaques he keepsat school,
and report speaks goldenlyof his profit.
For my part, he keeps merustically at home,
or, to speak moreproperly, stays me here athome unkept;
for call you that keepingfor a gentleman of mybirth
that differs not from thestalling of an ox?
Oh, his horses are bredbetter,
for besides that they arefair with their feeding,
they are taught theirmanage
and to that end ridersdearly hired.
But I his brother gainnothing under him butgrowth,
for the which his animalson his dunghills
are as much bound to himas I.
Besides this nothing thathe so plentifully givesme,
the something that naturegave me
his countenance seems totake from me.
He lets me feed with hishinds, bars me the placeof a brother,
and as much as in him lies
mines my gentility with myeducation.
This is it, Adam, thatgrieves me;
and the spirit of myfather, which I think iswithin me,
begins to mutiny againstthis servitude.
I will no longer endureit,
though yet, I know no wiseremedy how to avoid it.
Yonder comes my master,your brother.
Now, sir, what make youhere?
Nothing.
I am not taught to makeanything.
What mar you then, sir?
Marry, sir, I am helpingyou to mar that which Godmade,
a poor unworthy brother ofyours with idleness.
Marry, sir, be betteremployed, and be naughtawhile.
Shall I keep your hogs andeat husks with them?
What prodigal portion haveI spent
that I should come to suchpenury?
Know you where your are,sir?
O, sir, very well: here inyour orchard.
Know you before whom, sir?
Aye, better than him I ambefore knows me.
I know that you are myeldest brother;
and in the gentlecondition of blood, youshould so know me.
The courtesy of nationsallows you my better,
in that you are thefirst-born;
but the same traditiontakes not away my blood
were there 20 brothersbetwixt us.
I have as much of myfather in me as you,
albeit, I confess, yourcoming before me is nearerto his reverence.
What, boy.
Come, come, elder brother,you are too young in this.
Wilt thou lay hands on me,villain?
I am no villain.
I am the youngest son ofSir Rowland de Boys.
He was my father,
and he is thrice a villain
that says such a fatherbegot villains.
Wert thou not my brother,I would not take this handfrom thy throat
till this other hand hadpulled out thy tongue forsaying so.
Thou hast railed onthyself.
Sweet masters, be patient.
For your father'sremembrance, be at accord.
Let me go, I say!
I shall not till I please.
You shall hear me.
Ah!
My father charged you inhis will to give me goodeducation.
You have trained me like apeasant,
obscuring and hiding fromme all gentleman-likequalities.
The spirit of my fathergrows strong in me,
and I will no longerendure it!
Therefore,
allow me such exercises asmay become a gentleman,
or give me the poorallottery my father leftme by testament.
With that, I will go buymy fortunes.
And what wilt thou do?
Beg when that is spent?
Well, sir, get you in.
I will not long betroubled with you.
You shall have some partof your will.
I pray you, leave me.
I shall no further offendyou than becomes me for mygood.
Get you with him, you olddog.
Is "old dog" my reward?
Most true, I have lost myteeth in your service.
God be with my old master.
He would not have spokesuch a word.
Is it e'en so?
Begin you to grow upon me?
I will physic yourrankness,
and yet give no thousandcrowns neither.
Holla, Dennis!
Calls your worship?
Was not Charles, theduke's wrestler, here tospeak with me?
So please you,
he is here at the door andimportunes access to you.
Call him in.
'Twill be a good way, fortomorrow the wrestling is.
Good morrow to yourworship.
Good Monsieur Charles,
what's the new news at thenew court?
There's no news at thecourt, sir, but the oldnews.
That is, the old duke hasbeen banished
by his younger brother thenew duke,
and three or four lovinglords
have put themselves intovoluntary exile with him,
whose lands and revenuesenrich the new duke.
Therefore, he gives themgood leave to wander.
Can you tell if Rosalind,the duke's daughter,
be banished with herfather?
Oh, no, for the duke'sdaughter, her cousin, soloves her,
being ever from theircradles bred together,
that she would havefollowed her exile or havedied to stay behind her.
She is at the court
and no less beloved of heruncle than his owndaughter,
and never two ladies lovedas they do.
Where will the old dukelive?
They say he is already atthe forest of Arden
and a many merry men withhim,
and there they live likethe old Robin Hood ofEngland.
They say many younggentlemen flock to himevery day
and fleet the timecarelessly as they did inthe golden world.
What, you wrestle tomorrowbefore the new duke?
Marry, do I, sir,
and I came to acquaint youwith a matter.
I am given, sir, secretly,to understand
that your younger brotherOrlando
hath a disposition to comein disguised against me totry a fall.
Tomorrow, sir, I wrestlefor my credit;
and he that escapes mewithout some broken limb
shall acquit him well.
Your brother is but youngand tender;
and, for your love, Iwould be loath to foil him
which I must for my ownhonour if he come in.
Therefore, out of my loveto you, I came hither toacquaint you withal
that either you might stayhim from his intendment
or brook such disgracewell as he shall run into,
in that it is a thing ofhis own search
and altogether againstmy will.
Charles, I thank thee forthy love to me,
which thou shalt find Iwill most kindly requite.
I had myself notice of mybrother's purpose herein
and have by underhandmeans laboured to dissuadehim from it,
but he is resolute.
And thou wert best lookto't,
for if thou dost him anyslight disgrace,
or if he do not mightilygrace himself on thee,
he will practise againstthee by poison,
entrap thee by sometreacherous device
and never leave thee tillhe hath ta'en thy life
by some indirect means orother;
for, I assure thee--
and almost with tears Ispeak it--
there is not one so youngand so villainous
this day living.
I am heartily glad I camehither to you.
If he come tomorrow, I'llgive him his payment.
And so, God keep yourworship.
Farewell, good Charles.
Now will I stir thisgamester:
I hope I shall see an endof him,
for my soul, yet I knownot why, hates nothingmore than he.
Yet he's gentle, neverschooled yet learned,
full of noble device, allsorts enchantinglybeloved--
indeed, so much in theheart of the world
and especially of mine ownpeople, who best know him,
that I am altogethermisprized.
But it shall not be solong.
This wrestler shall clearall.
Nothing remains but that Ikindle the boy hither,
which now I'll go about.
Oh.
I pray thee, Rosalind,sweet my coz, be merry.
Dear Celia, I show moremirth than I am mistressof,
and would you yet I weremerrier?
Unless you could teach meto forget a banishedfather,
you must not learn me toremember any extraordinarypleasure.
Herein, I see thou lovestme not with the fullweight that I love thee.
If my uncle, thy banishedfather,
had banished thy uncle,the duke my father,
so thou hadst still beenwith me,
I could have taught mylove to take thy fatherfor mine.
So wouldst thou if thetruth of thy love to me
were so righteouslytempered as mine is tothee.
Well, I will forget thecondition of my estate
to rejoice in yours.
You know my father hath nochild but I,
nor none is like to have;
and truly, when he dies,thou shalt be his heir,
for what he hath takenaway from thy fatherperforce,
I will render thee againin affection.
By mine honour, I will,
and when I break thatoath, let me turn monster.
Therefore, my sweet Rose,
my dear Rose...
be merry.
From henceforth, I will,coz,
and devise sports.
Ah.
Let me see.
What think you of fallingin love?
Marry, I prithee, do, tomake sport withal,
ah, but love no man ingood earnest
nor no further in sportneither
than with the safety of apure blush
thou mayst in honour comeoff again.
What shall be our sport,then?
Let us sit and mock
the good housewife Fortunefrom her wheel
that her gifts henceforthmay be bestowed equally.
I would we could do so,
for her benefits aremightily misplaced,
and the bountiful blindwoman doth most mistake
in her gifts to women.
'Tis true,
for those she makes fair,she scarce makes honest,
and those she makeshonest, she makes veryill-favoredly.
Nay, now thou goest fromFortune's office toNature's.
Fortune reigns in thegifts of the world,
not in the lineaments ofNature.
No?
How now, wit!
Whither wander you?
Mistress, you must comeaway to your father.
Were you made themessenger?
No, by mine honour, but Iwas bid to come for you.
Where learned you thatoath, fool?
Of a certain knight
that swore by his honourthey were good pancakes
and swore by his honourthe mustard was naught.
Now I'll stand to it.
The pancakes were naught,and the mustard was good,
and yet was not the knightforsworn.
How prove you that
in the great heap of yourknowledge?
Aye, marry, now unmuzzleyour wisdom.
Stand you both forth now.
Oh.
Stroke your chins,
and swear by your beardsthat I am a knave.
By our beards, if we hadthem, thou art.
By my knavery, if I hadit, then I were;
but if you swear by thatthat is not,
you are not forsworn.
No more was this knightswearing by his honour,
for he never had any;
or if he had, he had swornit away
before ever he saw thosepancakes or that mustard.
Prithee, who is't thatthou meanest?
One that old Frederick,your father, loves.
My father's love is enoughto honour him.
Enough; speak no more ofhim.
You'll be whipped fortaxation, one of thesedays.
The more pity that foolsmay not speak wisely
what wise men dofoolishly.
By my troth, thou sayesttrue,
for since the little witthat fools have wassilenced,
the little foolery thatwise men have
makes a great show.
Ah, here comes Monsieur LeBeau.
With his mouth full ofnews.
Which he will put on us aspigeons feed their young.
Then shall we benews-crammed.
All the better.
We shall be the moremarketable.
Bon jour, Monsieur LeBeau.
What is the news?
Fair princess, you havelost much good sport.
Sport!
Of what color?
What color, madam?
How shall I answer you?
As wit and fortune will.
Or as the Destiniesdecree.
Well said.
That was laid on with atrowel.
You amaze me, ladies.
I would have told you ofgood wrestling
which you have lost thesight of.
Yet tell us the manner ofthe wrestling.
I will tell you thebeginning,
and if it please yourladyships, you may see theend;
for the best is yet to do.
Well, the beginning, thatis dead and buried.
There comes an old man andhis three sons.
I could match thisbeginning with an oldtale.
Three proper young men ofexcellent growth andpresence.
The eldest of the threewrestled with Charles, theduke's wrestler,
which Charles, in amoment,
threw him and broke threeof his ribs
that there is little hopeof life in him.
So he served the secondand so the third.
Yonder they lie,
the poor old man, theirfather, making suchpitiful dole over them
that all the beholderstake his part withweeping.
Alas.
But what is the sport,monsieur, that the ladieshave lost?
Why, this that I speak of.
Thus men may grow wiserevery day.
It is the first time thatever I heard
breaking of ribs was sportfor ladies.
Or I, I promise thee.
But is there any else
longs to see this brokenmusic in his sides?
Is there yet another dotesupon rib breaking?
Shall we see thiswrestling, cousin?
They are ready to performit.
Come on.
Since the youth will notbe entreated,
his own peril on hisforwardness.
Is yonder the man?
Even he, madam.
Alas, he is too young,
and yet he lookssuccessfully.
How now, daughter andcousin.
Are you crept hither tosee the wrestling?
Aye, my liege, so pleaseyou give us leave.
You will take littledelight in it,
I can tell you.
There is such odds in theman.
In pity of thechallenger's youth, Iwould fain dissuade him,
but he will not beentreated.
Speak to him, ladies.
See if you can move him.
Call him hither, goodMonsieur Le Beau.
Do so; I'll not be by.
Monsieur the challenger,the princess calls foryou.
I attend them with allrespect and duty.
Young sir, have youchallenged Charles thewrestler?
No, fair princess.
He is the generalchallenger.
I come but in as others do
to try with him thestrength of my youth.
Young gentleman,
your spirits are too boldfor your years.
You have seen cruel proofof this man's strength.
If you saw yourself withyour eyes
or knew yourself with yourjudgment,
the fear of this adventure
would counsel you to amore equal enterprise.
We pray you, for your ownsake,
to embrace your own safetyand give over thisattempt.
Do, young sir.
Your reputation shall nottherefore be misprized.
We shall make it our suitto the duke
that the wrestling may notgo forward.
I beseech you, punish menot with your hardthoughts,
wherein I confess me muchguilty
to deny so fair andexcellent ladies anything,
but let your fair eyes andgentle wishes
go with me to my trial,
wherein if I be foiled,
there is but one shamedthat was never gracious;
if killed, but one deadthat was willing to be so.
I shall do my friends nowrong, for I have none tolament me;
the world no injury, forin it I have nothing;
only in the world I fillup a place
which may be bettersupplied when I have madeit empty.
The little strength Ihave, I would it were withyou.
And mine to eke out hers.
Fare you well.
Pray heaven I be deceivedin you.
Your heart's desires bewith you.
Come, where is this younggallant
that is so desirous to liewith his mother earth?
Ready, sir,
but his will hath in it amore modest working.
You shall try but onefall.
No, I warrant, your grace,
you shall not entreat himto a second
that have so mightilypersuaded him from afirst.
You mean to mock me after.
You should not have mockedme before.
But come your ways.
Now Hercules be thy speed,young man!
I would I were invisible,
to catch the strong fellowby the leg.
Hold.
O excellent, young man!
If I had a thunderbolt inmine eye,
I can tell who shoulddown.
No more. No more.
Yes, I beseech your grace.
I am not yet wellbreathed.
How dost thou, Charles?
He cannot speak, my lord.
Bear him away.
What is thy name, youngman?
Orlando, my liege,
the youngest son of SirRowland de Boys.
I would thou hadst beenson to some man else.
The world esteem'd thyfather honourable,
but I did find him stillmine enemy.
Thou shouldst have betterpleased me with this deed
hadst thou descended fromanother house,
now fare thee well.
Thou art a gallant youth.
I would thou hadst told meof another father.
Were I my father, coz,would I do this?
I am more proud to be SirRowland's son,
his youngest son,
and would not change thatcalling to be adopted heirto Frederick.
My father loved SirRowland as his soul,
and all the world was ofmy father's mind.
Had I before known thisyoung man his son,
I should have given himtears unto entreaties
ere he should thus haveventured.
Gentle cousin,
let us go thank him andencourage him.
My father's rough andenvious disposition
sticks me at heart.
Sir...
you have well deserved.
If you do keep yourpromises in love
but justly as you haveexceeded all promise,
your mistress shall behappy.
Gentleman, wear this forme...
one out of suits withfortune,
that would give more butthat her hand lacks means.
Shall we go, coz?
Aye.
Fare you well, fairgentleman.
Can I not say I thank you?
My better parts are allthrown down,
and that which here standsup is but a quintain,
a mere lifeless block.
He calls us back.
My pride fell with myfortunes.
I'll ask him what hewould.
Did you call, sir?
Sir, you have wrestledwell
and overthrown more thanyour enemies.
Will you go, coz?
Have with you.
Fare you well.
What passion hangs theseweights upon my tongue?
I cannot speak to her, yetshe urged conference.
O poor Orlando, thou artoverthrown,
or Charles or somethingweaker masters thee.
Good sir...
I do in friendship counselyou to leave this place.
Albeit you have deservedhigh commendation,
true applause, and love,
yet such is now the duke'scondition
that he misconstrues allthat you have done.
The duke is humorous.
What he is indeed moresuits you to conceive thanI to speak of.
I thank you, sir, and prayyou, tell me this:
which of the two wasdaughter of the duke
that here was at thewrestling?
Neither his daughter if wejudge by manners,
and yet indeed, thesmaller is his daughter.
The other is daughter tothe banish'd duke
and here detain'd by herusurping uncle to keep hisdaughter company,
whose loves are dearerthan the natural bond ofsisters;
but I can tell you that oflate
this duke hath ta'endispleasure 'gainst hisgentle niece
grounded upon no otherargument
but that the people praiseher for her virtues
and pity her for her goodfather's sake;
and on my life,
his malice 'gainst thelady will suddenly breakforth.
Sir, fare you well.
Hereafter, in a betterworld than this,
I shall desire more loveand knowledge of you.
I rest much bounden toyou; fare you well.
Thus must I from the smokeinto the smother,
from tyrant duke unto atyrant brother,
but heavenly Rosalind--
Why, cousin!
Why, Rosalind!
Cupid have mercy, not aword?
Not one to throw at a dog.
Perth, no, thy words aretoo precious
to be cast away upon curs.
Throw some of them at me.
Come, lame me withreasons.
Then there were twocousins laid up
when the one should belamed with reasons
and the other mad withoutany.
But is all this for thyfather?
No, some of it is for mychild's father.
Ah.
O, how full of briers isthis working-day world!
They are but burs, cousin,
thrown upon thee inholiday foolery.
If we walk not in thetrodden paths,
our very petticoats willcatch them.
I could throw them off mycoat.
These burs are in myheart.
Ahem-- hem them away.
I would try,
if I could cry "hem" andhave him.
Come, come, wrestle withthy affections.
O, they take the part of abetter wrestler thanmyself.
O, a good wish upon you,
and you shall try in timein despite of a fall;
but turning these jestsout of service,
let us talk in goodearnest.
Is it possible on sucha sudden
that you should fall intoso strong a liking
with old Sir Rowland'syoungest son?
The duke my father lovedhis father dearly.
But does it thereforeensue that you should lovehis son dearly?
By this kind of chase, Ishould hate him,
for my father hated hisfather dearly.
Yet, I hate not Orlando.
No, faith, hate him not,for my sake.
Why should I not?
Does he not deserve well?
Let me love him for that.
Do you love him because Ido.
Mistress,
dispatch you with yoursafest haste,
and get you from ourcourt.
Me, uncle?
You, cousin.
Within these 10 days,
if that thou be'st found
so near our public courtas 20 miles,
thou diest for it.
I do beseech your grace,
let me the knowledge of myfaultbear with me.
If with myself I holdintelligence
or have acquaintance ofmine own desires,
if that I do not dream orbe not frantic--
as I do trust I am not--
then, dear uncle, never somuch as in a thoughtunborn
did I offend yourhighness.
Thus do all traitors.
If their purgation didconsist in words,
they are as innocent asgrace itself.
Let it suffice thee that Itrust thee not.
Yet your mistrust cannotmake me a traitor.
Tell me whereon thelikelihood depends.
Thou art thy father'sdaughter;there's enough.
So was I when yourhighness took his dukedom.
So was I when yourhighness banish'd him.
Treason is not inherited,my lord;
or if we did derive itfrom our friends,
what's that to me?
My father was no traitor.
Then, good my liege,
mistake me not so much tothink my poverty istreacherous.
Dear sovereign, hear mespeak.
Aye, Celia; we stay'd herfor your sake,
else had she with herfather ranged along.
I did not then entreat tohave her stay.
It was your pleasure andyour own remorse.
I was too young that timeto value her,
but now I know her.
If she be a traitor, why,then so am I,
for still, we slepttogether, rose in aninstant,
learn'd, play'd, eattogether;
and wheresoever we went,like Juno's swans,
still we went coupled andinseparable.
She is too subtle forthee;
and her smoothness, hervery silence,
and her patience speak tothe people;
and they pity her.
Thou art a fool.
She robs thee of thy name,
and thou wilt show morebright and seem morevirtuous
when she is gone.
Open not thy lips!
Firm and irrevocable is mydoom which I have pass'dupon her.
She is banish'd.
Pronounce that sentencethen on me, my liege.
I cannot live out of hercompany.
You are a fool.
You, niece, provideyourself.
If you outstay the time,
upon mine honour and inthe greatness of my word,
you die.
O my poor Rosalind...
whither wilt thou go?
Wilt thou change fathers?
I will give thee mine.
Oh, I charge thee,
be thou not more grievedthan I am.
I have more cause.
Thou hast not, cousin.
Prithee, be cheerful.
Know'st thou not,
the duke hath banish'd me,his daughter?
That he hath not.
No, hath not?
Rosalind lacks then thelove which teaches thee
that thou and I am one.
Therefore, devise with mehow we may fly,
whither to go and what tobear with us;
and do not seek to takeyour charge upon you,
to bear your griefsyourself and leave me out,
for by this heaven,now atour sorrows pale,
say what thou canst; I'llgo along with thee.
Why, whither shall we go?
To seek my uncle in theforest of Arden.
Alas, what danger will itbe to us,
maids as we are, to travelforth so far?
Beauty provoketh thievessooner than gold.
I'll put myself in poorand mean attire
and with a kind of umbersmirch my face;
the like will you.
So shall we pass along andnever stir assailants.
Would it not be better,
because that I am morethan common tall,
that I should suit me allpoints like a man?
A gallant curtle-axe uponmy thigh,
a boar spear in my hand;
and in my heart lie there
what hidden woman's fearthere will.
We'll have a swashing anda martial outside
as many other mannishcowards have
that do outface it withtheir semblances.
What shall I call theewhen thou art a man?
I'll have no worse a namethan Jove's own page,
and look you therefore,call me Ganymede,
but what will you becall'd?
Something that hath areference to my state.
No longer Celia, butAliena.
Oh, shh.
But, cousin,
what if we assay'd tosteal the clownish fool
out of your father'scourt?
Would he not be a comfortto our travels?
He'll go o'er the wideworld with me.
Leave me alone to woo him.
Let's away and get ourjewels and our wealthtogether,
devise the fittest timeand safest way to hide usfrom pursuit
that will be made after myflight.
Now go we in content
to liberty and not tobanishment.